All right, so let's talk about the initialization
of primitive data type variables including default values.
To use a primitive data type variable in code,
it needs to be initialised,
but this is not true for class static variables
and instance variables
which will have default values assigned to them.
Now, this initialization or lack thereof
is a common theme in the exam questions.
So what I'm gonna do is create a new class Bar
in our PrimitiveData project we created in the last video
and paste in some code.
Okay, and what we're attempting to do here
is demonstrate the default values that are set
for class static variables and instance variables.
So the default values for a static variable
should be zero for the seven types
byte, char, short, int, long, float, and double
and false for a boolean,
and we've also got some numeric instance variables here,
and they should also be set to a representation of zero
and also false for a boolean instance variable as well
which we defined on line 31,
and we've just got some output
checking to see whether that is the case,
and clearly, there's no initialization
that we've set in our code.
Let's run this code and confirm
that it actually does what we think it should do,
and you can see that the output values
that we're showing here,
the class variables all set to default values
and the same for our instance variables as well.
So that does confirm that Java initialises
these types of variables to default values.
Now with that said, Java's not as forgiving
when it comes to your local variables.
The compiler demands that you initialise
your local variables fully
before you use them in code
and, in fact, doesn't assign default values to them.
So to demonstrate this,
let's actually create a new class, Bar2,
and this class is, I'm gonna paste in some code
that's just got some local variables in the main method.
Okay, paste the code in.
And you can see at the moment,
we've got local variables defined, but not initialised
to a particular value and that's not being used at all.
So if we run this code, everything works.
Now if we actually hover over, we can see
that IntelliJ is telling us that the variables
aren't being used.
But now let's try and use them.
We'll print these variables out by adding
the appropriate code to do so.
So I'm going to add that after the definitions.
Pasting that code and suddenly we've got errors there,
If I hover over it,
you can see that it's telling us
that the variable may not have been initialised.
So to overcome this, let's actually initialise
these variables to some default values
that we'll assign ourselves.
So I'm going to again copy some code and paste it
before the output.
And you can see that I've defined a value
to each of our variables the errors then disappeared,
and we can run the code, and we get our output appearing
on the screen, as you can see.
So we've learned here that it's okay
to have an uninitialized local variable
as long as you never use it.
And a good IDE will prompt you to get rid of this variable
or mention or show you that it was unused as IntelliJ did.
But you will get a compile error if the local variable
is not initialised and then referenced as we've just seen.
And we got that error when we started trying
to print out the values.
Right so next, we need to talk about partial initialization
of variables.
Now partial initialization of a local variable is
a compile error.
Now some examples of partial initialization,
which we'll go through in code are initialization
in an if statement block without a corresponding else block.
Also initialization in a switch statement
but not in a default statement.
And initialization in a while loop, but note that
a do/while loop is always executed once, so that's okay.
So to demonstrate some of this let's create a new class
in our account project, we'll call it FooBar.
And as always, I'll paste in some code.
All right, so I can see here that the local variable
is initialised in an if/else conditional block.
And I've got a comment on there line 15,
which actually says the if/else statement satisfies
the compiler's full initialization check, so if you run
this code, we see that it works without any problems,
and we've got the value of 1.
But let's see what happens if we change some of this.
So we'll change the if/else statement to just being
if statement.
So I'm just going to comment out the else component.
And suddenly, we've got variable p
may not have been initialised.
On the code, we've now got an error variable p
And if we revert the code back to what it was before,
and we're back to how we were previously.
Right, so let's go ahead now and add a new if statement
as follows, and we're just going to copy and paste this
as always.
All right, so we've got the code there;
q is an uninitialized local variable here on line 24.
And we're using a different type of if statement
or a different expression.
This time it's a static boolean value, true in this case.
And that satisfies the compiler's full initialization check
because it's a static value.
So if we run this, that's correct, and q is set
to the value of 1.
So again the reason for that is the condition
of the if statement, the expression, is fully known
at compile time, and therefore this is allowed,
and we don't get an error.
Right, so continuing on, what happens in a switch block?
Let's have a look at a switch block.
What we're going to do is add a switch block
and test the local variable initialization there.
So I'm going to add this code below the other code.
All right, so there's our switch statement.
Now this code is fine and works.
You can see that some of the cases are setting
the value of r, which is our uninitialized local variable,
but it's also go the default value of r equals 3,
and because it's a switch statement with a default block,
that satisfies the compiler's full initialization check.
We don't get any errors.
We should be able to run it, and get a valid value
for the variable r set to the value of 2.
Now if we remove or comment out the default block,
we'll get a different result.
So let's go ahead and do that.
We'll comment out the default block.
Suddenly we've got an error: variable r
may not have been initialised.
So without a default block, all the possible pathways
through the switch statement can't be resolved
for the compiler, and it then assumes that the variable
may not be initialised and we get an error.
In fact, we can't run that because it's an error.
And again, variable r may not have been initialised
because the lack of the default block
because we've commented that out.
We'll undo those changes, run it again,
and the code now compiles and runs.
Right, so let's now look at a do while loop.
I'm going to put in some code for a do while loop.
Now a do while loop satisfies
the compiler's full initialization check.
You can see that s is an uninitialized local variable.
And if we run this, that works fine: s is assigned
the value of 0.
So if you initialise in a do while loop, as we've done here,
you won't ever get a compiler error
about your local variable being uninitialized,
and that's because the do while loop by its very nature
always executes at least once.
Right, so finishing up, let's try a while loop
in comparison to our do while.
So I'm going to copy this code and paste it in.
So the while statement satisfies
the compiler's full initialization check only if
the condition is statically known.
And you can see on line 63, our expression is value of true.
So therefore if we run that, that works fine
because we've got an expression true,
which is statically known at compile time,
but if we change that condition to something else,
we'll actually get the same errors.
So if we change that to v less than 1, our expression
for our while loop suddenly, we get u variable u
may not have been initialised.
So you could have the same problems with the four loops.
So look for similar conditions in exam questions
where variable is declared but not initialised.
Now a primitive data type can be initialised
and/or assigned a literal value, which we discussed somewhat
in the previous video.
However, it can also be assigned to other variables
as described in this slide.
So you can see that at the top of initialization
we've got some values there.
To a Literal as described in the previous section,
which we talked about in the previous video,
to a variable of the same data type,
we've got an example there of int i2 equals i1.
We can also initialise it to a variable
of a smaller data type.
So in the example there: short s1 equals 10
int i2 equals s1, we're assigning
this smaller primitive data type short to an int,
which is completely valid.
We can also use wrapper classes,
which will automatically do casting auto unboxing
as long as the wrapper's data type size
is less than or the same as
your variable's declared data type size.
And you can see the example there on the screen.
Another type of initialization or assignment
to a casted variable or literal.
So you can see that we're casting
the long value 100L to an int.
So by casting that to an int, that's completely valid.
To an instance variable of an object or class
as long as the above rules apply
and the access modifier allows it.
So more on this later in the course.
And you see I've got an example there:
Foo foo equals new Foo int i1 equals foo dot my integer.
And then also finally, to a Return value of a Method
in scope, as long as the above rules apply.
But again, more on that later.
And you can see an example there:
int i1 equals foo dot get Method.
The main thing the main take-away I want you to take away
from this lecture is this:
a local variable is not initialised with a default value.
You must initialise fully, not
in a conditional statement, switch statement,
while loop if all conditions are not met,
if you are using the variable in code.
If you never use the variable, as we saw,
you won't actually get a compiler error.
Right, so let's finish the video here,
and in the next one, we're going to start exploring
data type mismatches.
See you in the next video.